Exercise: Variable Handling in Java
we would create a program to practice creating variables in Java. In the end
we should observe the following.
We close any other project that is open, for example the project HelloWorld. We right click over the name of
the project and select Close.
We create a new project called Variable Handling. Click on file and select new project
we select the Java Category, and Java Application and after that click on Next
we assign a name and a path for our new project as shown below.
The project name is VariableHandlling.
The project location is in c:\Courses\Java Fundamentals\Lesson02 and click on Finish.
We do not select the Create Main Class.
We will create the main class by ourselves
create a new Java class. Over the name of the project, right click select New and after that select
Java Class
We assign the name VariablesHandlingTest to our new class and assigned to a new package name variables.
Remember that package is like a folder.
We will cover the topic of packages later in the course and click on Finish.
This is the result of the created class. We are going to modify this class with the following code.
You can click on the name of the file to download the source code.
First we declare a package as we said,
a package is like a folder.
After that we code public class VariableHandlingTest open (curly) bracket and write
the main method. As we said the main method is needed to execute our program, so we write public static
void main an Array of the Strings that is called args.
That means arguments, and we write a comment, as we said a comment doesn't affect the execution of our program
and this comment says: boolean variables declaration.
So we first declare a variable called flag1 and in this case this variable is of type boolean, and every sentence
in Java ends with semicolon. After the declaration of the variable flag1.
let's initialize this variable. We assign the value of true to this variable.
After that we declare and initialize a new variable called flag2 of type boolean. In this line as
we see we declare and initialize this variable in the same line, so we can declare and initialize a variable
in two lines or in one line.
The most common use is that we initialize a variable in one line, so we write: boolean flag2 = false;
and we print these values, so we write System.out.println.
write the string "boolean flag1 value" and concatenate the value of the flag1 variable.
After that we send the value of flag to to the console.
So we write "boolean flag2 value" and concatenate the value of flag2 variable, and this line prints a new
line in the console.
Next we use the byte variables.
We declared a variable called b1 and assigned a value of 10.
So we assign the decimal value of 10 to the byte variable b1.
literals in hexadecimal starts with 0x (or 0X) for example.
We declare a variable called b2 and assign a value of: 0xa and is equal to 10 decimal (number system).
So these is an hexadecimal value but is equal to 10 in decimal.
We print the byte value b1 and print the value b2. In both
we will get the 10 value, and print a new line too. Next,
we work with short variables. We declare a short variable: s1 = 2 ; and print the value of short
value s1. Print a new line. After that we declared a char variable. We declare and initialize in one
line of code.
The first declaration is in unicode. As a reference
You can check the next link.
So we declare two variables, as we see to separate the declaration of the variables,
we only use a comma. So, we declare a char variable called ch1 = 65; in the next value
we declared a variable called ch2 = 'A' (in uppercase). In the first case.
ch1.
we are using the unicode table to assign the value of 'A'.
So 65 is equal to 'A'.
We print the 'A' value in unicode, the value of 65
and print the value of char2, which prints the same value of 'A'.
We print a new line.
Next we see the int variables. We can use decimals values.
for example, we can declare a variable called: decimal = 100,  but we can use an octal
value which starts with 0.
In this case we declare a variable called octal, which starts with zero.
So is an octal value and assign the value of 0144.
we can also work with hexadecimal values
In this case an hexadecimal value starts with 0x so we can assign the value of 0x64
in the three cases.
it prints 100 in any case. And print a new line.
Let's work with long variables. By default any literal for example.
these literal of 10 is of type int, but we can change the type of the literal,
for example in this case using the L (or l) and it converts the literal to long type.
So we declared two variables in the first case, a variable called
long1 = 10; but the value of 10 is of type int and is converted to a long type.
We'll see conversions later in this course. But in the second case we assign a literal value of 20 an is
of type long. We print the long1 value and long2, and print a new line.
Float variables. By default a float literal (errata: literal not variable) is of type double, so we need to use F (or f) if we want the
literal to be converted to a float value.
We print the values
and finally the double variables.
As we said by default a  float literal is of type double. And with the suffix D
converts a literal to double.
We print the values of d1 and d2. We close the main method and close the class. With this ends the
code of the VariablesHandlingTest.java
As a next step
we execute our project.
We right click on the name of the VariablesHandlingTest.java file and select Run File.
And this is the result. As we see we've sent to the console every variable that we declare in the program.
So you can check the boolean, byte, short, chart, int, long, float and double values sent to the console.
Extra tasks of the exercise. Try to create more variables and verify the results.
And if you have any problems you can check the source code that we gave to you.
Exercise conclusion. With this exercise we are putting into practice the creation of variables, which are
the basis for storing information temporarily of our program.
For more information on the topic of variables in Java, as well as the data types, you can check the following
links.